---
title:
  'The Journey of Creating a High Performance Team'
date: '2020-12-6'
---

![](RackMultipart20210412-4-1v3930_html_f7eb9d9e6aefef31.png)

Figure 1: The Drexler/Sibbet Team Performance
Model illustrates the stages a team goes through
to reach High Performance (6).

## Introduction

In the following three texts I illustrate my
personal experience with creating a startup team
in the study of MSc in Technology Entrepreneurship
at DTU (Techincal University of Denmark).
According to the Drixler/Sibbet Team Performance
Model[1], there are 7 stages for self-organizing
teams. The model describes the process each team
member must go through to achieve high team
performance. Each team member can be at different
stages at a given time and every member must
resolve their issues at each stage to advance onto
the next stage. As a result, the Team Performance
Model is iterative and it is important that each
member continually resolve their issues to move
onto the stage of high performance (6) and sustain
it until the defined goals have been achieved.
Once the goals are accomplished the team can move
onto renewal (7) and perhaps choose to go through
the 7 stages again. The process shown in the model
is iterative, but when team leaders use the model
for the first time they often have no reference of
how iterative one can expect the process to be.
This contribution seeks to provide such an example
by showing the process in practice through an
exploration of my personal experience of creating
a startup team.

### [[August 22nd, 2020]]: First Contact

**The Context** : I had been accepted into the MSc
in Technology Entrepreneurship program and I was
ready to start my journey as an entrepreneur. It
was the end of August and I had spent most of my
summer reading into startups and I had even tried
out some ideas with a friend. As we found our
first idea wasn&#39;t feasible, my friend
wasn&#39;t willing to commit any longer and would
rather work on small projects, such as a soda
machine. Now I was looking forward to meeting this
group of people that all were willing to commit
and take on the startup adventure.

**The Text:** A guy walked over to me and said:
&quot;Hello my name is Stefan&quot;. We were
finished for the day and the entire class was
waiting for the train home. Today was the first
introduction day of my MSc study in Technology
Entrepreneurship. We had had many trust-building
exercises that day and I felt very relaxed and
safe around this crowd of people already. I
hadn&#39;t talked to this particular guy before
although I had talked to most of the other
students. It wasn&#39;t long after the initial
greeting, that he pitched his idea to me. Rentable
office space in unused restaurants. The idea
sounded interesting and we quickly started talking
about how we could make it work. It was like
playing an inverted game of Jenga. The idea was
initially very fragile, but we both took turns
putting in bricks to make it more stable. I felt a
jolt of energy going through my body and I felt
completely awake like I had forgotten that I was
tired. It was an exciting process. We had no idea
how to approach it, but what I knew was that this
was a person that I was able to brainstorm with
very well.

Just a few hours ago one of the team building
facilitators had been standing on a big rock like
a saint from heaven, delivering the holy words:
&quot;Team is more important than ideas since a
team can pivot an idea, but an idea cannot pivot a
Team&quot;. At this point, I felt like Stefan
could be part of that team. I wouldn&#39;t say
that I believed this was the greatest idea I had
ever heard, what I was most interested in was
whether we would like to work together. We decided
to get started as soon as the intro weekend was
over. The fact that we were both willing to get
started made me think that our levels of ambition
were matching quite well.

When I got home that day I felt excited about the
journey I was about to start. I didn&#39;t know
exactly where it would lead me, but I knew I liked
the activities involved. The following days we
talked about a lot of personal things just to get
to know each other better and build the trust
further. We talked about each of our girlfriends,
our working style, our workout regimen, concerts,
festivals, books, and movies. In the end, I felt
like I knew him very well but I still didn&#39;t
trust him as well as some of my other friends and
I believe the only reason for that was because he
hadn&#39;t had the chance to prove it yet. I
naturally assumed that he felt the same way. There
was only one way to find out, by starting to work
together.

**The Reflection:** Initially the group of people
in the MSc study already had a collective
objective, which was to start a startup. As
illustrated in appendix A1:&quot;First Text&quot;,
the orientation (1) phase was resolved since the
purpose had been established. Then we spent the
entire day building trust (2) and we felt it had
been resolved since there was mutual regard among
us. Then when I meet Stefan and as we start
talking about an idea for a startup we work
together to clarify the goal (3). In the end, we
commit to working on the idea after the
introduction days. Thus the commitment (4) and
implementation (5) stage had been resolved. We had
committed ourselves but despite that, we chose to
engage in trust-building activities. Based on the
Team Performance Model there was no reason for us
to go back to the trust-building stage (2) since
there was no disharmony or overload. Although we
had a few days before the agreed date which we had
committed to start workingâ€”namely after the
introduction days. Therefore the time spent in the
trust-building stage (2) was not out of necessity
but more out of general interest in each other.

### [[October 8th, 2020]]: Finding our business person

**The Context:** Our initial idea had failed, we
then chose to participate in a competition. We
ended up winning the competition with our idea of
an interactive video communication platform. With
the success of the project, we chose to continue
with the idea to make it into a business. We had
decided to bring Enrico onto our team. He had been
a part of our project in feasibility studies, but
not as an official member of the team. In the
autumn break, I told him about our decision to
invite him to join us, which he happily accepted.
The following text takes place in the first group
meeting after the vacation, where he had joined
our team.

**The Text:** We had all enjoyed our holiday. I
had spent most of my vacation working on our
startup, now named &quot;toGather&quot;. We had
realized that the initial name
&quot;WorkWork&#39;&#39; didn&#39;t match the
vision of the product, which was not to feel like
work but to be the embodiment of gathering people
together. We also had some time to think about who
to bring onto our team, from an outside
perspective we needed someone to be our business
person and we realized that our division of roles
could fit the very traditional roles of designer,
sales and technical responsible to Stefan, Enrico
and myself respectively. In all earnestness, it
was not the only deciding factor for me. It was
nice that it made sense from an outside
perspective, but in my perception, our discussions
were more frictionless when Enrico participated
and he brought a good mood to the team, which was
an important argument in the decision. There had
sometimes been some friction between me and
Stefan, but when Enrico took part we could often
move forward faster.

I woke up that day feeling a little more excited
than usual. Just in time for our first meeting I
had finished a feature that made it possible for
anyone in the app to create their rooms, which
meant that we were ready to open up the app for
many more people to use it simultaneously. The app
could now go viral. When I walked into the meeting
room I was surprised to see that Enrico was there
already, since he was usually a little late. I had
chosen to not be too strict with the meeting times
since I usually enjoyed a little chatting before a
meeting. I thought about how we should probably
just move the official meeting time instead of
allowing slack. We started the meeting by
welcoming Enrico to our team and we gave him a
quick introduction to what had happened in the
holidays. Then given the roles we wrote down what
responsibility areas each of us had. Once the
formalities were out of the way, we could move
onto the more exciting things that I had dreamt
about all night: &quot;How should we get people to
try out the new feature and let the app spread out
into the public?&quot; I told my first idea and
then I waited to see the response. Enrico was
silent in the beginning, while Stefan started
talking. I listened to Stefan while looking
indirectly at Enrico noticing that something was
unsettling about him. After Stefan had finished
his line of thought I said &quot;Yes...hmm. What
do you think? Enrico?&quot;. He answered:
&quot;Now there are some things that I am trying
to understand and I have many more questions that
I want to ask, before I can continue. I don&#39;t
want to hold you guys back, but also it is hard
for me to help if I don&#39;t fully understand
everything we do, since I haven&#39;t been a part
of the process in the same way you have from the
beginning&quot;. It was very clear that we needed
to bring him up to speed. We quickly cleared the
next few hours to allow Enrico to ask all the
possible questions that he had. I was super
excited about the things that I wanted to get
started with that day, but I also knew that I
wanted to invest in Enrico as our co-founder for
the long term. So it made sense to postpone the
immediate steps to get him to a level where he
felt like he confidently could contribute.

He asked about our process so far, our workflows,
our roles, individual goals, team goals, and more.
I felt like we had gone through these things
already but at the same time, it was nice to
refresh our reasoning behind each step we have
made. After we had spent some time answering his
questions, we went back to our current situation.
The following days and weeks a few questions of
this type still came up here and there, but there
were fewer and further apart.

**The Reflection:** Stefan and I were at this
point on our third iteration of the Team
Performance Model, In the first round we tested
out the first idea of office space in restaurants,
which we deemed infeasible, then we participated
in and won the innovation sprint challenge and now
we committed to a much longer iteration which was
to make the idea into a real business. This is
illustrated in appendix A1:&quot;Second
Text&quot;.

It is interesting to see that Enrico moved back to
previous stages not because anything changed but
because he became more committed to the project.
Before he was only a feasibility studies project
participant, but now he was a cofounder. Now he
had a higher interest in resolving earlier
stages&#39; issues to a higher degree. From a risk
perspective, this makes sense, since his personal
risk is higher due to his higher investment. He is
then incentivized to reduce that risk by
reassessing previous stages of the Team
Performance Model. I was frustrated that we could
not keep our pace, since Stefan and I were in the
High Performance (6) stage. I was not aware of the
Team Performance Model at the time, but I
intuitively understood that we needed to allow
Enrico to come up to speed, instead of carrying on
without him, leaving him with his questions to
himself. At this time of reflection, I realize
that the Team Performance Model could&#39;ve been
very useful for us to visualize that we were at
different stages here. The problem didn&#39;t lie
in the project, but the people. If I had drawn the
model and used Post-Its with our names to place on
the model, I could&#39;ve very clearly shown to
our team that this was a natural part of the
process.

### [[November 18th, 2020]]: Brainstorming session over beer

**The Context:** Enrico, Stefan and I had just
finished an entire day of working on our
startupâ€“toGather. Enrico had now been on our team
for several weeks. We are picking up on our roles
and getting used to the tasks that they hold and
as a result, we are iterating faster.

**The Text:** We are discussing assumptions and
doing interviews one after the other. The rocket
has launched. All three of us are strapped in. The
thrusters are pushing us forward, heating our
backs, while we are busy at work trying to build
the missing pieces for the landing. A landing in a
world we&#39;ve never been to. In many ways
running a startup is similar to flying a rocket,
although it may be even more iterative (read:
chaotic) since it is much harder to foresee and
thus plan the process of creating a startup.
Nevertheless, we were flying at a high altitude
and nothing could stop us.

Although suddenly in one of the interviews the
interviewee mentioned a competitor named
&quot;Wonder&quot;. I immediately looked up their
website and I found that they had an almost
identical design to the one we had envisioned for
our app. I turned around the computer to show the
website and I alternated looking into each of my
teammates&#39; eyes to see their reaction. They
used the exact same design of a floorplan that we
had envisioned, where participants can move freely
around to have conversations. We realized that
someone had already set foot on the destination of
our rocket. Once the interview ended there was a
silence. The thrusters had stopped and we were
floating in empty space. At this moment I was
starting to have second thoughts about whether we
could be successful in this market. Was there too
much competition? Why should customers choose us?
Our 4 biggest competitors had either just received
a lot of funding or had between 50 and 140
employees already working for them. Maybe we
should pivot to something less competitive?

I said &quot;I think we need a beer!&quot;, so we
bought some food and beers from the local
supermarket on campus and went back to our
classroom. We didn&#39;t want to talk too much
about the startup, in the beginning, so we shared
funny stories and made silly bets. A few beers and
stories later our mood was high. We talked about
the different cities we had grown up in and showed
them on google maps. I remember thinking to myself
that it is quite amazing that we are this diverse
group of people from all different countries and
with different professional and educational
backgrounds. I also wondered if that was an
advantage or disadvantage.

Stefan asked about what other startup ideas we
had. And it wasn&#39;t long before the whiteboard
was in action one idea after the other. All the
ideas were exciting and had some potential that
could be explored further. After the session, we
talked about what to do next. We discussed that we
wanted to do this right and not move onto
something new before we were absolutely certain
that we didn&#39;t leave a good idea behind. So we
agreed to continue with the current idea.

In the following weeks, we continue looking for
ways to differentiate ourselves and have a
competitive advantage, but we never come up with
an answer. On the last day of our semester, we
decide to give up on the idea and look for other
ideas, while staying together as a team. I felt
both sad and relieved at the same time. We had
spent more than an entire semester working on
this, but there was no way to escape the fact that
we had no competitive advantage, no substantial
differentiator and we were already far behind the
competition. I knew that there were other games
out there that we could play with a much higher
chance of winning. So I was excited to finally
start exploring these opportunities.

**The Reflection** : Before the text, we are at
the stage of High Performance (6) in the Team
Performance Model as shown in appendix A1:
&quot;Third Text&quot;. But then we begin to
question our ability to succeed. At that time we
are trying to answer questions related to our goal
since the direction that we are headed might not
be viable after all. We end up at the commitment
stage concluding that we don&#39;t want to commit
to this goal. As a result, we choose only to go
back to the goal-setting stage, since we still
believe in and trust our team. Now it is just a
matter of finding a goal that we want to commit
to. Thus again the progress of the team is far
from linear and we end up having to resolve the
questions related to the goal before we can move
on any further.

## Conclusion

Throughout the experiences described in the three
texts, it is clear that we have been very
iterative in our process. We have moved an
incredible amount between the stages of the Team
Performance Model. The Team Performance Model is
an iterative model, but when presented it might
not be clear how non-linear the process can be.
This contribution serves to exemplify how such a
process can play out in practice. I have shown how
much our team has moved between the stages in a
process that was far from linear. I clearly show
by example, the emphasis one should place on the
iterative nature of the model. This contribution
also illustrates how different team members can be
at different stages at a given moment in time and
what impact it can have on the overall team
performance. When Enrico joins the team in the
second text, the team members postpone their
immediate actions to prioritize advancing Enrico
onto the high-performance stage (6) of the Team
Performance Model. Based on my treatment of the
experiences I acknowledge the use of the Team
Performance Model as a tool for a team to obtain
an overview of their process. This overview can
then be beneficial in helping the team members
advance to higher stages by addressing the issues
that need to be resolved at each particular stage.
Several teams might however feel frustrated when
given such a tool because their team members are
not progressing as linearly as they expect. This
contribution seeks to relieve such team leaders by
showing that this process can be far from linear
in practice.

Personally, I wish that I had learned about this
model earlier. In my treatment of my experiences,
the Team Performance Model has been very useful in
identifying and understanding the problems that we
faced. Now with the model and this experience
using it in practice, I will in the future be able
to address the issues better and at least
understand why they are there once they occur. In
that case, I will want to draw the model and use
it as a visual communication tool with the team,
such that we can identify what stages we are at
and help the team ask the right questions to
advance to the next stages and ultimately achieve
high team performance.

[1]: Sibbet, D. (2011). _Visual teams: Graphic
tools for commitment, innovation, and high
performance_. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
